[SQUEAKING]
[RUSTLING] [CLICKING]
LAWRENCE GUTH: OK well, today
is our last day together.
I was remembering the
first day at the beginning
I said to everybody I'm
excited about projection
theory and these basic
problems we just solved
in the last couple years.
And we're trying to
describe the ideas in this.
And the beginning of the class
I say all these things I'm
excited to do.
And I wonder, am I going-- are
we going to manage to do this?
Yeah, anyway.
Now it's at the end and
we've been working steadily
and done some of it.
OK.
So today we'll try to say the--
finish the story of proving
the sharp projection theorems
and to say the last couple
of ideas that go into it.
So the first idea goes back
to the beginning of the class.
It goes back to using
the Fourier method
and getting a little
bit more out of it
than we had realized
at that time.
And then after that-- so this
thing, I'll do by itself.
It's like remembering
the Fourier method
and seeing how much
we can learn from it.
Then I'll remember what was
the whole big theorem that we
wanted to prove, and what are
all the things we knew about it.
And the last idea in the
class is combining information
from many different
scales, which
allows us to combine all
of the previous ideas
into one big argument.
Master argument.
And this way of combining
scales has only been--
I would say has only been
around for five years or so,
and is also something--
it's not that complicated.
And I think also something
that might be of value
to take with you
away from the class.
OK.
All right.
So part 1 is the well-spaced
case and the Fourier method.
So all of these
things that were--
these sharp projection theorems,
there's some kind of geometric
measure theory analog of the
Szemerédi-Trotter theorem.
So for reference, let's remember
first the Szemerédi-Trotter
theorem.
And here's the version of it
that will be relevant for us.
So if E contained in R2
is a set of N points.
And L sub r of E is the
set of lines, little l.
So that little l
intersect E is at least r.
Then the question is,
how big could this
be in terms of N and r?
And the conclusion is
that the size lr of E
is bounded by n squared.
Actually, let me do a big R
to match some other notation.
N squared over R
cubed plus N over R.
Is N squared over R cubed
comes from the grid example.
And this N over R comes
from a very simple example,
where you just draw
a few lines and you
put R points on each of them.
OK.
And we're trying to
investigate, to what extent
this continues to hold if
we replace our pure points
by some little balls and by our
pure lines by some thin tubes?
And here is one clean
version of that,
that if the points
are quite spread out,
they're what's
called well-spaced,
then this holds almost as real.
So this is a theorem of Hong
Wong, Noam Solomon, and me
from around 2018 or something.
So E contained in R2 is
a set of N delta balls.
E is contained in the unit ball.
AND they're well spaced.
They're as spread
out as possible.
So they obey the condition that
if you take E and you intersect
it with a ball of radius
N to the minus 1/2,
then that's at most around 1.
So in other words, if I take a
unit square and I subdivide it
into squares of side
length N to the minus 1/2--
that's been chosen so that there
are N squares in this picture.
And then I put 1 or roughly 1
point in each of these squares
at one delta ball,
then this is what?
This is our what
our set looks like.
So this is a well-spaced set.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: So if the
size of E intersect B,
is that supposed to be a
delta ball covering number?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
Let's make that.
Yeah, that's right.
Thank you.
That's a delta ball
covering number.
OK.
All right.
And then there's one more
hypothesis, which is OK,
so then we could say what TR of
E is the set of delta tubes T,
so that T intersect E
delta is at least R.
And here, if you take
such a delta tube
and you wiggle it
imperceptibly, you
will have another
such delta tube.
And we want to count
those as being the same.
So I'll put here
essentially distinct.
OK.
Now there's one
other hypothesis,
which is that R is
not too small, which
I'll explain in a minute.
The hypothesis says R is at
least a little bit bigger
than delta times E delta.
And then the conclusion
is almost the same
as before, that TR of E is less
same same squared over R cubed.
This two tildes
here means that it's
hiding something like
a delta to the epsilon
or something like that.
But it looks almost
the same as this.
OK, let's compare
these two theorems.
One difference is that
in the first theorem,
we had an extra term
here, which I have not
written in the second theorem.
And the reason is that this
second term is relevant
when R is bigger than
the square root of N.
So the second term, this
dominates if and only
if R is bigger than
square root of N.
But in the well
space case, it's not
possible for a tube to have more
than square root of N points
on it, so this
case never arises.
OK.
So that's why we
don't have that.
The other difference is that
we added this lower bound on R.
So let me explain
why we did that.
So remark.
An average for a
random delta tube T,
the expected size of T
intersect E, that's covering,
that would be delta
times E delta.
This is for each of
these delta points,
each of these
little delta balls,
there are this many of
them, the probability
that a random delta
tube intersects
that point is about delta.
OK.
SO if you just take any old
tube, you'll have that many.
You'll hit that many
delta balls from E--
tubes that hit this many delta
balls of E are not special.
Any old tube will do.
So if R takes that value, this
upper bound isn't true at all.
This could be way
bigger than that
because it could be
basically all the tubes.
But rather remarkably-- there's
a rather remarkably sharp phase
transition that you increase R
just a little bit beyond this
threshold, and then you
get a bound that matches
Szemerédi-Trotter.
OK.
So that is the statement
of the theorem.
And it says in a nutshell that
Szemerédi-Trotter basically
continues to hold if you
take a well-spaced set,
which is one of the cases
we mentioned last time.
Any questions or comments
about the statement?
So I'm going to do a proof
sketch of this theorem.
So let me first mention the
tools that will go into it.
There's the Fourier method.
There's double counting.
And then there's-- I guess I'll
call this playing with different
scales.
The theme of this last class is
playing with different scales,
which is a simple sounding and
old idea, which nevertheless,
people recently have found a
lot of new ways of doing it.
OK.
All right.
So let me start with
the Fourier method.
Let me label this
list of hypotheses.
Hypotheses.
And Fourier method.
OK.
So it's been a while.
In lectures 3 and
4 of this class,
we developed a Fourier analytic
method to estimate stuff
like this.
And if we had kept
having problem sets,
and if I had been
really clever, I
would have had you remember
it on the last problem set,
getting ready for this lecture.
Anyway.
If you take the method
exactly the way we did it back
at the beginning
of the class, say
that if we have the hypotheses,
then the size of TR of E
will be bounded by delta--
OK, I have to actually check.
Delta inverse E delta
R to the minus 2.
I considered redoing
this in the last class
to remind us all, because I
don't expect it really to have
it on the tip of your brain.
But I decided it was not
that much fun for a thing
to do in the last
class, and also
that I had to manage the time
to explain the other stuff.
So I'd like to take
this as a black box,
that it's something you
can do with the tools
that we've already have.
OK.
Now how does this
compare to our goal?
This E delta, by the way, is
N. So this is delta inverse N R
to the minus 2.
Well, it depends on
how delta and N and R
are related to each other.
But there's a particular
case where it just
gives exactly the right thing.
In a particular case is that
if R is the smallest that it's
allowed to be--
so let's say it is delta to the
minus epsilon delta E delta.
So in this case, if I solve
for the delta inverse,
delta inverse would be around N
over R. And then I plug in here.
And I get the one
that this is N over R,
is N squared over R cubed.
And this is
Szemerédi-Trotter bound.
So this Fourier method
actually gives the right
answer in an interesting case.
But then if you make R bigger,
then if you do this computation,
this ends up being bigger.
And this will be bigger
than N squared over R cubed.
OK.
Now another
interesting basic thing
about this that is
perhaps surprising
is that as delta--
if delta gets bigger,
the right-hand
side gets smaller.
So as we make our tubes thicker,
we actually get a better bound.
So if R is bigger-- this
is the smallest R could be.
So the other options that
R is bigger than this.
So delta to the minus epsilon
delta E delta is less than R.
And let's say that R is less
than the square root of N.
Because as we
mentioned earlier, R
can't be any bigger than
the square root of N.
OK.
Then I'm going to set a scale
rho so that rho times N is
around R. Rho times N is
around R. So how big is rho?
Well, rho is going
to be R over N.
So it will be smaller
than N to the minus 1/2.
But it will be
bigger than delta.
Because delta N
was smaller than R.
And I'm going to
increase delta to rho
so that rho N will be around
R. So rho will be around there.
And then we're going
to study E rho, which
is the rho neighborhood of
E. So let's make a picture.
Here is the picture of
our well-spaced set E.
And then we're going
to have a scale rho,
which is smaller than this scale
N to the minus 1/2 but bigger
than delta.
And we'll look at
that guy, E rho.
And originally, we're
trying to find--
our original problem is to
understand delta tubes that
hit a lot of balls.
So this might be one.
This is T delta tube
and TR of E delta.
E delta is just E, but I
put the delta to remind us.
But now that we have these
thicker guys, we could study--
I could study a rho tube that
contains a lot of rho balls.
So this might be T rho.
That might be a tube that
intersects E rho a lot.
Well, maybe for the same R, but
also maybe for different R's, we
might be interested.
So now let's make a definition.
So TR of-- TR tilde
of E rho, this
is the set of rho tubes T rho.
So that if I take T rho
intersect it with E rho
and I take its rho covering
number, that's at least R tilde.
And now the same
argument as before
gives us a bound for this thing.
So if we have our
hypotheses and if R tilde--
let's see.
Well, let me not
keep track of it.
If we have our hypotheses and R
tilde is big enough, then, yeah,
I'll just-- yeah, here we can
put R tilde as at least as big
as R, then TR tilde of E
rho will be bounded by--
Well, we'll have rho
inverse times E delta times
R to the minus 2--
times R tilde to the minus 2.
And this rho
inverse is N over R.
So that's N squared over
R times R tilde squared.
Just by thickening the
tubes, we get these bounds.
And let me mention an
important special case.
So e.g, TR of E rho is bounded
by N squared over R cubed.
All right.
So as it's-- it's a surprising
thing that as we increase rho,
we get a better and better
upper bound for this.
Now we can't increase it.
There's a limit to how
much we can increase it.
Because we do need--
we do need this condition.
So this gives some
upper bound for rho.
But taking rho as close as
you can to that upper bound
is a good idea.
And when we make rho that
big, then we get this.
OK.
Now have we proven the theorem?
So what I got-- yeah.
AUDIENCE: Yeah.
Just a question about
the bounds there.
You apply the same
Fourier method?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yes.
AUDIENCE: But will the E
delta state not become a rho?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Right.
So it would be E rho.
But you can maybe
see from the picture.
Where did we introduce E rho?
So E rho is equal to E
delta, is equal to N.
Now that's a
special-- that's where
we're using that our set
is well-spaced right.
So that's a great thing to--
So the so the question
was, should this
should be a rho
instead of a delta?
And how does that affect things?
And the answer is
yeah, great point.
This should be a rho
instead of a delta.
But for our set, it
doesn't change anything.
So if you look at our set, our
set has only one delta ball
in each N to the minus 1/2 ball.
So when you thicken
them a little bit,
the number of balls
you see doesn't change.
It's still N. So that is where
we are using this hypothesis.
Yeah, great point.
OK.
So when I first saw this, I
thought that we were done.
But it's not quite true.
So our conclusion
in the theorem is
that we're going to try to
estimate how many of these guys
there are, thin tubes, delta
tubes that have R balls in them.
And we've counted the
number of thick tubes
that have R balls in them.
Now, every thin tube with
R balls, if you thicken it,
you get a thick tube
with at least R balls.
But inside of a thick
tube with R balls,
there may be many thin
tubes with R balls,
and we've only
counted them once.
So we do-- we still
have an issue.
That's not super difficult, but
it's important to recognize it.
So issue 1, rho tube may contain
many tubes of TR of E delta.
So what would that
scenario look like?
Well, we have our rho tube here.
And inside we would have
a bunch of delta balls.
So at least R of them, but
maybe more than R of them.
So let's say that T rho
intersected with E, so
delta, that would be the same
as T rho intersected with E rho.
Let's say that it's R tilde.
Which is at R. Might be R
but it might also be bigger.
And then inside of here we
may have many delta tubes
that each contain R. OK.
So now we have some cousin
of our original problem.
We have R tilde delta balls.
And we want to count how
many R-rich tubes there are.
We don't know as much
about how they are spaced,
but also we don't need to
have such an incredible bound.
So by induction, we can assume--
we can reduce to the case
that each T and TR of E delta
has many delta
balls at both ends.
So what I mean by
that is here's a tube.
So the tube, it has a
bunch of delta balls in it.
So it means that there
are a bunch at one end
and a bunch at the other end.
Maybe also a bunch
in the middle.
Maybe it's better to
draw what it's not.
What it's not is like
they're just all on the left.
OK.
So in a nutshell,
how would we do this?
If this was the situation
that all of the delta balls
were actually in a much
shorter tube, well,
then in my original
picture, I could
cut my set E into
separate pieces
and just look at R-rich tubes
on each of those pieces.
And that could do
some induction.
OK.
So then we do a double
counting argument.
I'm going to do--
so we're going to count
just pairs of delta balls.
And so I'll have T of E delta
intersect tubes in T rho.
So the number of yellow
tubes in this picture.
Times R squared.
So I take a tube and I
pick two points in the tube
kind of near opposite ends.
And for any two points, there is
only one tube that joins them,
so this should be bounded
by R tilde squared.
Double counting.
So we're counting-- we're
counting pairs T, X1, X2, where
T is in this set and
X1 and X2 are in T
and they're near opposite ends.
So how many are there?
Well, for each tube, there are
R squared choices of X1 and X2.
On the other hand,
there are only R tilde
squared choices for X1 and X2.
And for each X1 and X2,
there's only one choice of T.
So this is bounded by this.
OK.
So double counting
and the Fourier method
are the two
foundational approaches
that we did at the
beginning of the class.
This one was short
enough that I thought
I could recall it for us.
OK.
All right.
So now TR of E delta is bounded
by maybe sum on R tilde bigger
than R dyadic.
We're going to look
at TR tilde of E rho.
But then we'll multiply
by R tilde over R squared.
All right.
Why?
So every R-rich
delta tube, if you
thicken it up to
be a rho tube, it
will be an R
tilde-rich rho tube.
And R tilde will be at
least R. So they're all in
here somewhere.
And in each one of these
guys, there's at most
this many R-rich delta tubes.
This is bounded by this.
And then if we plug in our
bounds, everything will work.
So this is bounded by N squared
over R times R tilde squared.
And then we have R tilde
squared over R squared.
Just cancels.
And we get N squared
over R cubed.
And that's the end
of the proof sketch.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: What is the sum?
LAWRENCE GUTH: The sum has
logarithmically many terms,
and so it gets absorbed.
Maybe I should write that.
That's right.
That's gets absorbed
in the last step.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: So the only part
where we use that is well space,
it's like the delta
rho [INAUDIBLE]
is the only place we're using.
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah,
so the question
is, where did we
use its well spaced?
And I think it's
instructive to trace where
we used all the hypotheses.
So let's label this WS.
Well, let's label
it well spaced.
Which we can abbreviate WS.
So where did we use
that as well space?
We used it here.
And that's the only place.
So this guy is N. That's
the only place that we used.
OK.
We had another hypothesis
that R is bigger than average.
R bigger than average.
I have, unfortunately,
hidden a little bit
where we used that hypothesis.
But it was in this
Fourier estimate.
So here we use R big and
perhaps a little bit--
we might use a little
bit of well, space too.
Although we don't need anything
as strong as what's up there.
Where did R big come in?
Well, we had all
these tubes and we
took some of the characteristic
functions of the tubes, smoothed
out a little bit and we did
Fourier analysis with them.
And there was a high frequency
part and a low frequency part,
and some middle frequencies.
This is the contribution
of the high frequency part.
The high frequency
part dominates,
immediately you get this.
The very low frequencies
corresponds--
with the low
frequency dominated,
it would mean that
R was equal to this.
And there are some
in-between frequencies,
so you have to compute a
little bit to see that they're
controlled by those two cases.
Good.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: Perhaps because the
Fourier method doesn't really
need well-spacing
condition, but would it
be possible to use well-spacing
condition to put a cap
on the high frequency domain?
Because it seems like
if the frequency is
corresponding to
the delta balls,
it should be low if the delta
balls are very small space.
LAWRENCE GUTH: So the question
is about the relationship
between the spacing of E and
the frequencies in the Fourier
transform of E. Is
that the question?
Yeah.
So if you just took
one delta ball here
and you smoothed out its
characteristic function,
it would have a Fourier
transform that was supported
on a delta inverse bar.
Now we have a bunch of them.
And so each of them
has a Fourier transform
that's supported on
a delta inverse ball.
And now we're going
to add them all up.
Now when we add them all up,
what happens is complicated
and it depends on exactly
where we put them all.
But absent any
detailed information
about exactly where
we put them all,
you would typically expect that
they would have maybe square
root cancellation and
that the sum would still
be pretty evenly spread
over a delta inverse point.
Yeah.
So being well
spaced, we would see
quite a lot of high frequency.
But I don't know that
we could recognize
whether we were well spaced.
I guess if you had more
points closer together,
you would see more
low frequency stuff.
Good.
Other questions or comments?
OK.
I had, myself, a
couple comments.
So one thing was, it seemed
kind of magical to me
that we ended up with
the right answer.
And looking back, in all the
proofs of anything related
to Szemerédi-Trotter, it seems
rather magical to me that we get
the right answer.
So the Szemerédi-Trotter,
or this theorem,
there's a construction.
You take a grid.
You take some lines
at rational slopes.
You compute a little bit
and you see what happens.
And you get this N
squared over R cubed.
Then independently
from that, you
look at some cell partitions
or some this or some that,
or some Fourier analysis and
with completely unrelated
argument, you get something.
And if you're lucky, it's
N squared over R cubed.
And we declare victory.
In all the cases, I don't
really understand why we
are getting the right answer.
And it's perhaps
worth mentioning that
Szemerédi-Trotter has
many cousin problems,
which are almost
as simple to state,
but no one knows
the right answer.
So for instance, if you replace
straight lines with circles
or degree 2 curves
or unit circles,
or make up your favorite
class of curves,
you get natural questions
that people have studied hard
and almost every one of them we
cannot prove matching examples
and upper bounds.
So it is plausible that
there is no deep reason why
this bound matches the example,
but that we were just lucky.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: Most of other
variations of the problem,
is it harder to
show a similar bound
or to find examples analogous to
the kind of different problem?
LAWRENCE GUTH: So
the question is,
for all these other
variations, is
it harder to prove upper bounds
or harder to find good examples?
In all these problems,
all of the known examples
look a lot like
the grid example.
They involve grids
of points, and you
try to intersect it with a lot
of circles or a lot of parabolas
or what have you.
And there's some upper bound.
And the proofs of
the upper bounds
are not so different from the
proofs that we have shown.
But the numbers that come
up, they just don't match.
And popular opinion
probably is on the side
that the upper bound
should be improved.
But we are talking
about open problems.
So nobody knows.
OK.
So that's one comment.
Another comment is that in
the context of the Furstenberg
problem, there is
a key difficulty
that the Furstenberg problem was
false over the complex numbers.
The Furstenberg conjecture.
But it's true over
the real numbers.
So always on the
lookout for what steps
distinguish the real numbers
from the complex numbers.
This argument does
not distinguish them.
This statement can
be-- you can replace
all the R's with C's
and adjust a few things
and it's still true.
So this part of the proof is
not helping with that issue.
Yeah.
Cool.
OK.
So that was part 1 of the class,
the well-spaced case using
the Fourier method.
Part 2 combining all
the stuff we've done.
Let's start by remembering what
is the big theorem that we're
discussing the proof of.
And then what are all the
things that we've done.
In the last part
we'll talk about how
to put the pieces together.
OK.
All right.
So here is the big theorem
that we would like to prove.
So if E is a delta T set
in the unit ball in R2.
And let's say that the size
of E is delta to the minus T.
And then for every point in E,
TX is a delta S set of tubes
through the point x.
And there's no
loss of generality
in assuming that this is
delta E to the minus S.
Put them all together to
make a set of tubes T. OK.
And then thinking about how
these tubes intersect E. So
let's say R is the typical
value of E intersect T delta
covering number
typical over T and T.
Could mean average if you like.
But after a little
bit of pigeonholing,
we can assume that they're all
about the same as each other.
OK.
So then the goal is to
say that R is not too big.
These tubes can't overlap
the points too much.
R is bounded by the maximum
of three things corresponding
to three scenarios.
OK.
So A is the stars example.
These tubes have nothing
to do with each other.
So the number of dots
on each tube is just 1.
That's scenario A. B is
the really interesting one,
it's the integer grid.
And so this-- we've written
things a little differently
but this corresponds to the
numerology in Szemerédi-Trotter.
And C is the regime
where random tubes--
No.
If this set E is really
large, random tube
will hit a lot of
points of E. And this
set T certainly could be
made out of random tubes.
OK.
So that is the theorem
we're trying to prove.
And we have developed
many techniques and tools
to work on this theorem.
And we have proven
many cases of it.
And let's document that.
OK.
So cases we have
discussed the proof.
OK.
So there are these A,
B, and C scenarios.
And so we should sort
this theorem according
to who's bigger, A or B or C.
So A dominates,
that's if and only
if, S is greater
than or equal to T.
Let me write it
actually as T is less--
S is greater than or equal
to T. And in this case,
it's true by a double
counting argument.
And C dominates if
and only if S plus T
is greater than or equal to 2.
And that's also true
by the Fourier method.
So B dominates otherwise,
and it's actually
important to write
down this otherwise.
So S is between--
T is between S and 2 minus
S. That's what's left.
And this one we don't know yet.
But we do know a couple of
special cases of this hard case.
But we do know if
E is AD regular.
So that was my
open-ended Shmerkin.
We talked about it last time.
And we do know so it
is true E is regular
and it is true if
E is well spaced.
We just talked about.
And that's striking because
AD regular and well spaced
are the two extremes in the
way that E could be spaced.
And the other stuff
is in the middle here.
So actually, people in the
field have run into this problem
a number of times.
OK.
So there are several cousin
problems of this Furstenberg set
problem.
There's the Kakeya problem,
which is the most famous.
There's also the Falconer
distance set problem.
And in both of those
problems, there
was a period where
people knew how
to do these two extreme cases.
And we thought-- we
hoped maybe we were close
and we tried to do the
stuff in the middle,
and it was hard and messy,
and we couldn't do it.
So an open-ended Shmerkin
wrote their paper.
They said we solved
the AD regular case,
and we know that previously
some people solved
the well-spaced case,
and what's left is
to do the stuff in the middle.
But we're not sure whether
that might be very hard.
OK.
Cool.
And so the last
idea in the proof
is an idea from
Reyn and Wang how
to break up the general
case into pieces that can
be handled by these methods.
The first part of
what they did is
they souped up this
well-spaced case a little bit.
So they proved
that it's true if E
is something called
semi well-spaced
that I will define for you.
Definition soon.
OK.
It's a mild
generalization of this.
And the proof is fairly--
a little more complicated
but it's similar ideas
to what I showed you.
It doesn't distinguish R
from C. It's the same tools
that I showed you.
OK.
And then the really
important thing
is how to put all
these things together.
So we're going to put
all these things together
by using a multi-scale
argument, which
is similar to the
submultiplicative Lemma.
That was one of the key
things in the AD regular case.
So let me remind you of that
and draw the important picture
again.
All right.
So multi-scale argument.
OK.
So we're going to have delta--
we're going to have
some scale which
is in between delta and rho.
And we're going to
visualize E at this scale
but also at that scale.
So now we have a general
E. But it's uniform.
And so I think of it as
having some rho balls.
So these circles are E rho.
Inside of each rho ball,
we have some delta balls.
So those are the delta
balls in E delta.
OK.
And we have some fat tubes.
Like that.
So those are the
tubes that scale rho.
Inside of the fat tubes
we have some thin tubes.
I should draw it a
little differently.
So those are the delta tubes.
Now what do we notice?
We notice that the
R that's associated
to E delta and T delta can
be bounded by a coarse scale.
So this R is how many
delta balls are there
in an orange tube like this?
So first, we can ask,
how many rho balls
does the orange tube have?
So that would be
R of E rho T rho.
And then we look inside
each of those rho balls
at this short delta tube.
And we ask, how many
delta balls does it hit?
And let's call one of these
balls B, the typical rho ball.
And that will be R of EB TB.
What is EB TB?
So EB is just E
intersect B. And then
let's rescale it so that
B becomes a unit ball.
And TB is you take T--
well, you take T
intersect B, where
T is in T. You take all
these little pieces of tubes
and then again you rescale so
that B becomes the unit ball.
And so EB is a set of
delta over rho balls.
And TB is a set of
delta over rho tubes.
We do this rescaling
so we can relate this.
Think of this as a case
of our original problem.
We can use induction.
OK.
But this inequality is just
how many delta balls are there
in the orange tube?
Well, how many rho
balls does it hit
and how many delta balls
are in each rho ball?
OK, cool.
So by this multi-scale argument,
we can take our original problem
and break it up into pieces.
We get to choose rho, so we
have some flexibility there.
Then we can repeat that.
We can break these up
into pieces and so on.
And we would be very happy
if all of these pieces
are in the list of things
that we understand.
And then we could multiply
together all those bounds
and get a bound.
And in some cases, we'll
get the sharp bound.
And then that's how
they prove the theorem.
OK.
Now to keep track
of what happens,
everything is described in
terms of the branching function.
And for people's
intuition, it has
been very helpful
to draw pictures
of the graph of the
branching function.
OK.
Do graph of the
branching function.
So we're going to suppose
that E is uniform.
And then I'm going
to draw a graph that
encodes the information of
how many rho balls there
are to cover E at every scale.
So on this axis,
I want to put rho.
And what I'm going to
put is log delta of rho.
So it's going to be a
number between 0 and 1.
And now on this axis, I want to
understand the covering number E
rho.
And what I'm going to put here
is the logarithm in the base 1
over delta of this
covering number.
OK.
So if E delta or
delta to the minus T,
then when you plug
in 1 here, that
corresponds to the scale delta.
So this is delta
E to the minus T.
So this logarithm
would be T of this.
So I'm going to call
this variable T--
I'm going to call
this variable X.
And this is F of X. F is
the branching function.
So if E of--
E delta is delta E to the
minus T, it means F of 1
equals T. If E is a delta T
set, then it means that F of X
is bigger than T
times X. So here's
the straight line with slope
T. And I'll put this in blue.
F of X is bigger than T times
X. There are many things
that we could draw that
do that, maybe like that.
So these pictures
always start at 1.
Because when X is 1, it means
we're talking about the scale
rho equals 1.
And this is a subset
of the unit ball.
So that's the covering
number at scale 1 is 1.
So it always starts there.
Any questions or
comments about these,
setting this up as a graph?
OK.
So now what do we know
about this function F?
So F is monotonically
increasing.
Why?
As we go this way,
rho is getting smaller
and the rho covering number
is only going to get bigger.
But it doesn't
increase too quickly.
So F of X plus
delta X is less than
or equal to F of X plus 2
delta X. So F is 2 Lipschitz.
Why?
Well, if we have a rho ball
and then we decrease rho,
we can always cover that with
a certain number of rho tilde
balls.
So B rho is covered by
rho tilde rho over--
so if rho tilde
is less than rho,
then B rho is covered by rho
over rho tilde squared rho tilde
balls.
And we may or may
not need all of them,
but the most we could
need is all of them.
And that would correspond
to equality here.
So F is 2 Lipschitz.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: So the 2 comes
from the dimension?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Two comes
from the dimension.
This 2 is this 2, which
comes from the dimension.
Yeah, OK.
That's right.
So let me say E is uniform, E
is contained in the unit ball,
and E is in two dimensions.
And if you change this
2 to a D dimension,
the only thing in this
discussion that would change is
that these 2's would become D's.
Yeah, thank you.
Yeah, good.
OK.
So to get a feel
for this, I will
draw a few pictures of the
branching functions for cases
that we have considered.
OK.
So for the AD
regular set, before I
draw it picture in
your mind's eye,
what does the branching
function look like?
It is a straight line.
The well-spaced example.
So well-spaced example
looks like this.
It's a straight line of
slope 2 up to the height T,
and then it's a horizontal line.
It's a flat line after that.
Cool.
OK.
And now I can tell you what
is the semi well-spaced set.
So here's what we do.
So semi well-space
definition is now.
So T is going to be in between
minus S and S. That's good.
That's the region we
don't already understand.
So E delta is going to
be delta to the minus T.
So that point there is going to
be in our branching function.
And then what I will do is I
draw here a line with slope S,
and here a line with slope
2 minus S. By the way,
S is between 0 and 1.
So 2 minus S is the bigger one.
And I extend these
lines until they meet.
They'll meet somewhere.
And then the branching
function F of X
has to lie above this stuff,
and it has to go there.
That's the definition
of semi well spaced.
OK.
So Reyn and Wang,
they proved that
in the semi well-spaced
case, this theorem is true.
And we won't do the whole proof.
But the proof is a variant
on what we saw here,
where you combine
in a clever way
the Fourier method and the
double counting method.
And at a very high
level, this setup is--
this slope 2 minus
S is the slope
where the Fourier method works.
And this slope S is the slope
where the double counting
method works.
And so this picture turns out to
be the situation where you can
combine those two methods well.
OK.
All right.
So now let's think about
what happens when we
do this multi-scale argument.
What happens to the
branching functions?
In other words, I
start with this setup,
I want to understand this guy.
And it depends on the
branching function of E delta.
And I get these two
new smaller problems.
What is the relationship
between this branching function
and these branching functions?
The relationship
is really simple.
So F of X itself, this is the
branching function of E delta.
And it looks like something.
OK.
It could be anything.
And then we have this scale rho.
So over here is
log delta of rho.
And if you think
about this set E rho,
well, it's just the
branching function of E rho
is the same as the branching
function of E delta.
Except it just stops at rho.
And we don't look at
any smaller scales.
So this here in orange is
basically the branching function
of E rho.
Then we look inside of this
ball and we look at all of the--
start at the scale
rho and then we
look at all of the
smaller scales of E.
So this thing here is--
let me say this describes F EB.
This is basically the
branching function of EB.
OK, great.
So what's the situation?
We begin with an arbitrary
branching function
that just obeys this condition.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: Going back
to the multi-scale
or the submultiplicative Lemma,
why is it-- like the second one,
the R of EB TB when it's like
the number of delta balls
is the same in the rho ball.
They have the same.
LAWRENCE GUTH: Right.
Right.
So this R of EB TB
is supposed to be
counting the number of delta
balls in a segment like that.
Now, why is it counting that?
Who is EB?
EB are the delta balls in the
rho ball in B. And TB are--
I take the tubes and
I just take the part
of the tube that is in the--
that's in the ball.
AUDIENCE: OK.
So then R E rho, that's the
number of rho balls in the rho 2
based on the product is just
the number that amounts to 2.
LAWRENCE GUTH: Right.
Right.
So at T rho is this
blue tube and R of E rho
T rho is the number of rho
balls in the blue tube.
And then if we take
an orange tube,
it will go through this
many of the rho balls.
And we want to know how
many delta balls are there
in each of those bits.
So now we have some tubes
at this tubes inside of B
and points inside of
B. And we blow that up.
And that's over here.
OK, good
OK.
So here's something
we might try.
We start with E delta T delta.
We don't know how to handle it.
We look at the
branching function.
I can cut the branching
function anywhere
I like and produce two
branching functions.
And I can repeat that.
And then I can take the
different branching functions
I get.
And hopefully, I can
put them into the list
that I know how to handle.
And then I'll multiply together
and I'll get an answer.
So let me do a couple examples
of this concatenation method
and we'll see how it works.
Concatenation method.
All right.
So let me do the example where
our graph consists of two lines.
So it has a line of
slope T1 up to somewhere.
So here's log delta of rho.
And then it has a line
at a different slope,
which let's say is smaller.
So here's slope T2 to the end.
It's 1.
And let's say that
this final height is T.
So how are they related?
So delta to the
minus T is E delta,
which I can read off from
my final branching function.
That's the size of E rho
times the size of EB.
Number of rho balls times number
of delta balls per rho ball.
So that is rho to the minus T1.
So this is slope T1.
Times delta over
rho to the minus T2.
So now let's see what happens.
So R of ET is bounded by R
of E rho T rho R of EB TB.
Scenario 1.
In this scenario 1, T1 and T2
are both in this middle range
where B dominates.
So then this guy will
give me rho to the S
over 2, rho to the
minus T1 over 2.
Because this is
option B. B dominates.
And this guy here will give me
delta over rho to the S over 2,
delta over Rho to
the minus T2 over 2.
Because that's option B.
This is not B as in ball,
this is B as in A, B,
and C, the three options.
All right.
When you multiply it out,
something nice happens.
What happens when we
multiply these together?
We get delta to the S over 2.
And what happens when we
multiply those together?
At first it looks like an unholy
mess, but it's the same as this.
And so it's delta to
the minus T over 2,
which is B, which is
what we were hoping for.
This is a smiley face.
But let me mention
another scenario.
Scenario 2.
Maybe T1 is bigger
than 2 minus S,
and maybe T2 is smaller than
S. So maybe this first one
is really quite steep.
And then the second
one is quite shallow.
OK.
Well, now this first one,
when I evaluate this,
I'm in the C domain.
I get rho to the 1 minus T1.
And when I evaluate this,
because this T2 is less than S,
I'm in the A domain, which is 1.
And that's not what
I'm hoping for.
That's actually much
bigger than my goal.
So actually, let me
add to scenario 2.
But T is in the middle.
T is a average of T1 and T2.
T1 is bigger-- is quite
big, T2 is quite small.
But this average is going
to be in the middle.
Since T is in the
middle, this is the goal.
How does this
compare to the goal?
Not so obvious,
but it's actually
much bigger than the goal.
What went wrong?
Remember that at each
step when I bounded R,
my theorem bounds R by a
maximum of three things.
Maximum of A, B,
and C. So this C
is way bigger than
B in this regime.
And this A is way bigger
than B in this regime.
And B times B would be my goal.
So this is way too big.
So it doesn't work.
OK.
So lesson that we
learned here is
that we want to break up
F into pieces so that--
OK, I'll say it in words.
So first of all, we'd like to
be able to analyze each piece.
So we want each piece to
be on the list of things
we understand.
So if you don't have a
sharp bound for the piece,
there's no way you're
going to have a sharp bound
for the whole thing.
But also, we're not happy
with just any of these.
We really want them all
to be in case B. Right.
So we really want
each piece to be
either AD regular with T of
that piece in our middle range,
in the B range, or
semi well spaced.
OK.
Cool.
So the very last idea is
that indeed, you can do this.
You can start with an
arbitrary branching function,
and then you can break
it up into pieces
where each piece is like this.
I'll write it down in a second.
Draw an example.
Probably the most
important idea behind this
is the Rademacher theorem.
So the Rademacher theorem says
that a differentiable function--
a Lipschitz function
is differentiable
almost everywhere.
And so this function F, we
don't know a lot about it,
but we did see that
its Lipschitz function.
And so it's differentiable
almost everywhere.
So that means that we
can cut up our interval
into little intervals
where maybe you
have to throw out a tiny bit.
But on almost every
little interval,
it's approximately a
constant slope example.
So you can reduce everything--
just by Rademacher theorem,
you can reduce everything to
the AD regular irregular case.
And that's an indication
that AD regular case
is really important.
It's not just a special case.
However, if you do
that, we would not only
have slopes in
here, we would also
have slopes that are
too small or too large.
So we want everybody
to be in case B.
And that's why we
need some extra stuff
like the semi well-spaced.
OK.
So I will write down
this last thing.
So final Lemma.
If F is a function
from 0, 1 to R,
which is 2 Lipschitz
and increasing,
then we can break up 0,
1 as a disjoint union
of some intervals, maybe
plus tiny leftover.
And then on each I,
either F restricted to I--
either F is almost
linear with slope TI,
and TI is in our range.
I should say one other thing.
Let's say F of 1 is T
and T is in our range.
Oh, yeah.
And we should-- sorry.
We should have F of X
is bigger than T of X.
So this is our setup.
We have a delta T set.
We're looking at its
branching function.
So either its almost
linear and its slope
is in the desired range or
on I, F is semi well spaced.
OK.
It's not so difficult
to prove once you think
to try to prove it, but I'm
just going to illustrate it
with an example.
So suppose F looks like this.
And so the slope is
increasing for a while.
I guess it needs to start
bigger than T. So a bit tricky
to draw this picture here.
So it needs to stay above
this dotted line, right?
So it's going to start tangent
to the line, which is OK.
The slope increases for a while.
Has a maximum slope,
and the slope decreases.
And it goes like that.
And as this slope
increases, there
is a key moment where
the slope gets too big.
Over here, slope is 2 minus
S. And maybe at the end
the slope is too small.
The slope is less than S.
OK, so what should we do?
Well, this whole thing
here, this whole thing
is semi well-spaced.
And at the beginning we can
take very short intervals.
So we'll have this guy and
this guy, and this guy.
And these blue guys are almost--
they're short, so
it's almost linear.
And the slope is not yet
bigger than 2 minus S.
So the slope TI is less than
2 minus S. Bigger than S. OK.
This is not a proof.
But there are not that many
ways this function could look.
And if you draw five of them,
you can convince yourself.
Then if you want, you can prove.
OK.
So to summarize, This
picture, this fact
is very powerful because it lets
us break up our original problem
into smaller problems.
And the smaller problems in
terms of the branching functions
because the smaller
problems are just
little pieces of the branching
function of the bigger problem.
And when you do
that, there are--
what originally looked like we
just had a few special cases,
now we can take any combination
of those few special cases.
And that turns out to be a lot.
And even to be everything.
So that's the last idea.
The proof.
The proof how to put
the pieces together.
And so these pieces were
not just special cases.
They are really the
fundamental building blocks
of the whole story.
And it also is striking to me
that this multi-scale argument
was really crucial in both the
AD regular case and the not
the AD regular case.
In the AD regular case, these
problems were all the same.
And then seeing that sameness at
all these different situations,
it gave us some extra
rigidity and structure.
In the not AD regular case,
by definition, these problems
are different.
And that means that gives
us a whole menu of problems
to choose from.
And then we can look
through this menu
and try to find the
things that we understand.
OK, cool.
OK.
So that was an outline
of projection theory.
Thank you for coming
with me on this outline.
It's been nice
talking with you all.
And yeah, let's stop
the class there.